To the guardian Maitreya we bow in supplication.
Something there is to be given up fully through knowing
And something else which can only be actualized,
Because of which this treatise has been composed
With the wish to distinguish the traits defining these.
A summary of everything in brief
Should be known to include the following two motifs,
Since everything can be summarized fully in terms
Of phenomena together with pure being.
That which is classified here as phenomena
Is samsara; that which is classified precisely 
As pure being is nirvana, transcendence of grief,
As this is defined by the vehicles, which are three.
Here the traits of phenomena are defined
As duality plus assumption and formulation,
Whose appearance is the mistaken conceptual process,
Since what appears is not and is thus not real.
No referents have ever existed either
And, being but concept, consist of conceptualization.
The other factor, pure being, is defined
As suchness, in which there is no differentiation
Between a factor perceived and a perceiver,
A signifier contra a signified.
Because what does not exist appears, delusion
Provides the cause for completely afflicted states;
Since things like illusory elephants appear,
Even what does exist does not appear.
If either the lack of existence or the appearance
Were missing, delusion and freedom from delusion
And likewise states afflicted in every respect
And thorough refinement would be unjustified.
These two are not one and the same nor do they differ,
Because, between that which exists and that which does not,
A distinction exists and yet does not exist.
Because it provides a thorough introduction
To their characteristics as well as their rationale,
Their neither being the same nor different,
The ground in common and not in common shared,
And the lack of appearance involving perceiver-perceived,
This sixpoint approach to phenomena is the best.
Of these, the defining traits and the rationale,
As well as the lack of sameness and difference,
Are just as these were demonstrated in brief.
As long as there is someone circling somewhere,
These are the grounds in each and every case—
The constituents of beings and those of the vessel.
The constituents of the vessel appear to be shared,
The awareness being the common experience;
Some of the constituents of beings 
Are experienced in common and some are not.
Further, birth and conventions, to nurture, subdue,
Benefit, harm, excellent features, and faults
Are mutually caused by way of an interchange,
Because of which these are experience shared in common.
Since the ground and awareness, happiness, suffering,
Action, transition at death, captivity, birth,
And liberation are not observed in common,
They comprise the realm of experience not shared in common.
What appear to be outer, perceivable in common,
Are perceiving awareness; they are not referents
Existing as something extrinsic to consciousness,
Precisely because they are common experiences.
The counterpart is the one in which what is perceived
Is not shared in common. Here awareness’ referent
Is the minds and so on associated with others.
These do not comprise an object of mutual exchange
For perceiving awareness not resting nor resting poised,
Because, for those not resting in equipoise,
It is but their own conceptions that appear;
And because, for those who are resting in equipoise,
It is its faithful reflection that appears
As the object encountered during samadhi absorption.
If what appears as perceived does not exist,
Whatever appears as perceiver does not exist;
Due to this, there is also a rationale
Behind the breakthrough to freedom from this appearance
Of perceived and perceiver, because without beginning
A volatile state prevails; and because duality’s
Not existing at all is what really exists.
Through introducing traits and a ground at all times,
Definitive verification as well as encounter,
Recollection and immersion into its core,
This sixpoint approach to pure being is unsurpassed.
The defining traits in brief are just as they are.
The ground consists of the whole of phenomena
And supreme teachings, the whole of the sutra collections.
The term “definitive verification of this”
Refers to the whole of the path of application,
Comprised of appropriate mental cultivation
Based on the sutra collections of Mahayana.
The encounter attained because of authentic view
Is the path of vision, on which the suchness attained
Is in a fashion direct, whatever experienced.
Although reality has been seen by awareness,
Recollection—the path of meditation,
Comprised of factors inducing enlightenment—
Is needed to eliminate the stains.
Here, immersion into its core complete,
Is suchness rendered free of any stain,
Where all appear exclusively as suchness—
And this completes the transformation as well.
This tenpoint presentation of transformation
Provides an unsurpassable introduction,
Because it is the way to approach the essence,
Ingredients and individuals,
The special traits, requirements, and ground,
Mental cultivation and application,
The disadvantages and benefits.
The essence of transformation is introduced
As suchness freed of stain, and what that means
Is superficial stains appear no longer
And that which manifests is now the suchness.
To introduce the ingredients, or contents:
Awareness in the form of the vessel shared
Undergoes a transformation to suchness;
The sutras undergo a transformation
Into the suchness, the actual dharmadhatu;
And beings’ awareness-components not shared in common
Undergo a transformation to suchness.
The approach as related to individuals:
The first two of these are transformations to suchness
Pertaining to buddhas as well as to bodhisattvas;
The last of these pertains additionally 
To Shravakas as well as Pratyekabuddhas.
The introduction to traits especially advanced
Pertains to buddhas as well as to bodhisattvas:
The distinguishing trait of totally pure domains;
That which is gained through attaining the dharmakaya;
Sambhogakaya; as well as nirmanakaya— 
The insight, instruction, and consummate mastery—
Are attainments distinctively greater comparatively.
The introduction to realizing what is required:
The distinguishing factor of previous wishing prayers;
The distinguishing factor of Mahayana teaching
As focal point; and the further distinguishing factor
Of effective application to all ten levels.
The introduction involving the ground or support
Is into original nonconceptual wisdom
As this is approached in a manner involving six points,
Since the focal requirement, attributes surrendered,
The correct way to apply the mind in practice,
The defining characteristics and benefits,
And full understanding are hereby introduced.
The first of these, the focal requirement,
Should be known to be introduced in four points,
Since what is required is Mahayana teachings,
Commitment to these, along with certitude
And fully completing the two accumulations.
The second, which treats of surrendering attributes,
Is also introduced by way of four points,
Since what is unfavorable and the remedies,
The suchness as well as the realization of this
Are attributes whose surrender leads the way.
By doing this in respective order as follows—
The coarse and the middling followed by those which are fine,
And those which persist for a very long time indeed—
These attributes are surrendered entirely.
The introduction to practicing wisdom correctly
Entails the following four specific aspects:
Practice involving something to focus on;
Practice involving nothing to focus on;
Practice involving no subject to focus on;
Practice whose focus is nothing to focus on.
The defining characteristics here encountered 
Should be known to consist of the following three aspects,
Since one effect is repose in pure being,
Which means to actually live in pure being,
The non-dualistic and inexpressible; 
And one effect relates to appearances’ absence,
Where duality, assumption and formulation,
Faculties, objects, principles of awareness,
And vessel-like worlds’ appearances are absent;
So these correspond to there being no observation,
No description, no ground and no appearances,
No principles of awareness, and no place,
Which is how the sutras express the traits
Defining original nonconceptual wisdom;
And one effect relates to appearances’ presence,
Since experience of every phenomenon
Is equivalent to the center of open space,
And formations all are appearances like illusions. 
The four points introducing the benefits
Include the complete attainment of dharmakaya,
Attainment of bliss which nothing can exceed,
Attainment of mastery over the power of insight,
And attainment of mastery over the power to teach.
The introduction to thorough understanding
Should be known to include the following four points:
A full understanding regarding the remedy;
A full understanding regarding the characteristic;
A full understanding regarding distinctive marks;
And a full understanding regarding the five effects.
What is to be understood as the remedy here
Is nonconceptualizing original wisdom,
Since perceiving phenomena, individuals,
An alteration as well as dichotomy,
Denial as well, when this is entertained,
Are five distinct forms of perception of non-existents
For which it is taught to comprise the remedy.
Full understanding regarding the characteristic:
A lack of the process of thought and correct transcendence,
Tranquilization, things in their composition,
And predetermination are the five
The exclusion of which is the concrete characteristic.
Completely understanding its marks refers
To its being free of conceptualization as such,
To the fact that it is not transitional,
To its not remaining while being there all along,
And its hallmark of being completely unexcelled;
These make up its five distinctive marks.
The last, the full understanding of its effects,
Includes its lasting effect on conceptualization;
Its affording unsurpassable happiness;
Its effecting elimination of obscurations—
Afflicted emotions and cognitive obscurations;
The original wisdom attained in the wake of this
Provides the access to every aspect of knowledge;
It enables achieving attunement with buddha-fields
And thorough maturation of sentient beings,
And brings about revelation and transmission
Of knowledge which is complete in every aspect;
These five are the special features of the effects.
The introduction to mental cultivation:
For individuals wishing to cross the threshold
Into original nonconceptual wisdom,
For any bodhisattva, Awakening Hero,
Here is how to cultivate the mind.
By virtue of one’s ignorance of suchness
The “store of all seeds” of what is unreal, mere invention,
Is the cause for two which do not exist to appear;
And, with that as the base, there are grounds for diversification,
Due to which the cause and effects as well,
In spite of appearing, still do not exist.
With that appearing, pure being does not appear;
Through that not appearing, pure being indeed appears.
Through such cultivation of mind, when properly done,
The Bodhisattva steps across the brink
Into original nonconceptual wisdom.
Through focusing thus, mere awareness is focused on,
Through which there are no referents to focus on;
Through there being no referents that could be focused on,
There is no such mere awareness to focus on;
Through that not existing on which to focus, the verge
Is crossed into focusing free of this twofold division;
No split into two existing on which to focus,
This is original nonconceptual wisdom,
Since this is what is defined with the utmost precision
As that which involves no object, no focusing,
No attributes on which to focus at all.
The penetration of levels through application
Should be known to entail the following four steps:
Through intense application involving informed commitment,
The stage where training is done through informed commitment
Comprises the step of definitive verification.
To connect with superior, firsthand realization
Is the first of the levels, the stage the precise is encountered.
Through intense application employing meditation,
The impure levels followed by those which are pure
Are what comprise the stage of recollection.
Through application involving final perfection,
The spontaneous deeds of a buddha continually flow;
Hence this is the stage of immersion into the core.
The introduction to disadvantages
Includes the four which would follow as a result
Of there being no transformation; namely, the flaw
That preventing afflictions’ entry would lack a support;
The flaw of the path’s introduction lacking support;
The flaw of there being no basis of imputation
For speaking of individuals reaching nirvana;
As well as the flaw of no basis of imputation
For distinctions between three forms of enlightenment.
The introduction to the benefits
Should be known to include these four, but in the reverse.
To show how phenomena not existing appear,
They are likened to dream and compared to illusion and so on;
To illustrate the total transformation,
To space it is likened, to gold and water and so on.
The verses distinguishing phenomena and pure being composed by
the guardian Maitreya are herewith concluded.




The dualistic appearance of our enemies we think is truly real
This is what creates the suffering of our anger
And the pain of the anger's consequences
But the pain of our angry actions' consequences
Is greater than the pain of the anger ever was

The dualistic appearance of our friends we think is truly real
From this comes the suffering of change and your heart gets broken
Our friends make us suffer more than enemies ever could

And so if you know the practice so profound
Of being free of attachment but full of love
Both friends and enemies turn into Dharma resources
Adverse conditions become your Dharma friends

Phenomena are samsara, confused projections
Pure being is nirvana past all grief
These two are not one and the same nor do they differ
The one's like ice, the other's like its water

If you see through phenomena, samsara's confused projections
Pure being manifests for you
This is transformation, pure appearances shine
Like reflections on the melted ice's water




When thoughts that there is something perceived and a perceiver
Lure my mind away and distract,
I don’t close my senses’ gateways to meditate without them
But plunge straight into their essential point.
They’re like clouds in the sky, there’s this shimmer where they fly;
Thoughts that rise, for me, sheer delight!


When kleshas get me going and their heat has got me burning,
I try no antidote to set them right;
Like an alchemistic potion turning metal into gold,
What lies in kleshas’ power to bestow
Is bliss without contagion, completely undefiled;
Kleshas coming up, sheer delight!


When I’m plagued by god-like forces or demonic interference,
I do not drive them out with rites and spells;
The thing to chase away is the egoistic thinking,
Built up on the idea of a self.
This will turn those ranks of maras into your own special forces;
When obstacles arise, sheer delight!


When samsara with its anguish has me writhing in its torments,
Instead of wallowing in misery,
I take the greater burden down the greater path to travel
And let compassion set me up
To take upon myself the suffering of others;
When karmic consequences bloom, delight!


When my body has succumbed to attacks of painful illness,
I do not count on medical relief
But take that very illness as a path and, by its power,
Remove the obscurations blocking me,
And use it to encourage the qualities worthwhile;
When illness rears its head, sheer delight!


When it’s time to leave this body, this illusionary tangle,
Don’t cause yourself anxiety and grief;
The thing that you should train in and clear up for yourself—
There’s no such thing as dying to be done.
It’s just clear light, the mother, and child clear light uniting;
When mind forsakes the body, sheer delight!


When the whole thing’s just not working, everything’s lined up against you,
Don’t try to find some way to change it all;
Here, the point to make your practice is reverse the way you see it,
Don’t try to make it stop or to improve.
Adverse conditions happen, when they do, it’s so delightful—
They make a little song of sheer delight!
